If people started to pull money from
open AI and they couldn't raise money,
that would be a cascading effect in
terms of the entire ecosystem.
>> Exactly. That's exactly what I think is
going to happen. Our guest today is Gary
Marcus. He is a real critic of large
language models and what they're capable
of.
>> The world has gone allin on neural
networks and invested massively in it on
an idea that to me never made sense.
Large language models are not going to
get us to the holy grail of so-called
artificial general intelligence. In the
investment community, people are
starting to say, "Hey, I see all this
circular financing results on return on
investment are not that great. Maybe
this doesn't make sense.
[music]
Hey, this is Steve Eisman and welcome to
another edition of the Real Eman.
And today we have a different kind of
guest. Today, our guest today is Gary
Marcus, who some of you may have heard
of cuz I've discussed him on my podcast
many, many times. He is a real critic of
large language models and what they're
capable of, which is really the
foundation of the entire AI story. And
so, Gary's is going to discuss his
theory, what LLM models are all about.
Gary, welcome to the Real Eman.
>> Thanks for having me. And also thanks
for that incredible shout out you gave
me on CNBC a month or two ago.
>> Oh, you're very welcome. Well, it was
welld deserved. Before we get started,
why don't you give my audience, most of
them don't know you, so why don't you
just give people your background to so
that they understand you're actually
entitled to have an opinion on this
subject.
>> So, I've been studying intelligence kind
of all my life. I started working on AI
when I was 10 years old, as soon as I
learned to code. And I spent a lot of my
career studying natural intelligence,
humans, how kids learn language and
things like that. But my dissertation,
which I did at MIT, was on two things.
It was on how kids learn language, but
it was also on neural networks. Um,
which are a particular approach to
artificial intelligence or to modeling
the human mind that is I would say
loosely inspired by the brain. It's a
very nice piece of marketing. It makes
you think that it's really based on the
brain. It's not really um it has a loose
affiliation, but these things called
neural networks were popular. I looked
at them in the '9s and they weren't
really such good models of how human
minds work. But I got involved in trying
to understand what they actually did.
And then when deep learning came back in
fashion in 2012, I was like, hold on,
I've seen this stuff before. It's a lot
like what I did my dissertation on. And
I had written a book in 2001 called the
algebraic mind where I actually
anticipated the problem of
hallucinations and some of the problems
of reasoning that we're seeing
>> which we're going to talk about
>> and we'll get there. Uh and so a lot of
the issues to me were familiar when this
new thing came back in fashion and I
knew immediately that it was going to
have problems in certain things. I wrote
a piece in the New Yorker in 2012 called
is deep learning a revolution in
artificial intelligence? And I said,
'Look, this stuff is really interesting.
I admire Jeff Hinton for having stuck to
his ground for a long time.
>> Who was that?
>> Jeff Hinton. He just won the Nobel Prize
last year and he's one of the major
players in deep learning. I see.
>> Um, as is his his student Ilius, who's
someone who recently came around to my
side. So, he was a major player in this
field. He kind of kept the torch going
when neural networks were not very
popular to his credit. Um, but you know,
not everything goes to his credit. We
don't have to go into all of it, but um
you he kept the torch going. He
resuscitated this um and relevant to
your listeners. What re really
resuscitated was his student Ilia
Sitzkever and maybe a couple other
people figured out how to take these
systems that they had been building for
a long time. I mean really they go back
to the 1940s and Hinton did some
important work in the mid 80s. They
showed you could do the same stuff but
with GPUs, graphics processing units
that Nvidia was building. And at the
time, Nvidia was just building them for
video games mostly.
>> And so these things existed for video
games. And the student had the clever
idea that what they were really good at
was parallel computation, which is to
say computing something
um in many little pieces at the same
time instead of one at a time. So the
classic paradigm is step by step. the
central processing unit goes through
some software program line by line. That
isn't entirely true anymore, but it's
kind of the simplification that people
might learn if they took computer
science 101. And what GPUs did is they
let you break up a a problem into a
bunch of little pieces that you do at
the same time. They were built to do
this for computer graphics. You'd look
at a screen or you would want to render
a screen. You'd want to say, "What's the
next frame in this video game?"
Instead of doing it one thing at a time,
which would take forever, you would do
the whole scene at once. So, you'd have
one little subprocessor doing this pixel
and another one doing that pixel and so
on. And I mean, they work great for
that. I I've occasionally played video
games and what graphics processing units
could do is incredible. Um so so Skaver
and um I'm blanking on the other uh guy
who was an author on the paper showed
was a good way of running these
so-called neural networks and we can
talk about what those really are and
what that means but they found a way to
run them on graphics processing units
and that mean meant that they could go
two things meant they could go much
faster and they could use much more data
everything that people had done in that
field at that point I don't know 60
years old or whatever it was was kind of
like a toy model and they showed you
could do it for real if you did it on a
GPU. You could do it at a much bigger
scale. And so everything that we look at
was kind of born in that moment in 2012.
And as soon as it happened, two things
happened. The new New York Times wrote
an article about how amazing this stuff
was. And the next day, I wrote a piece
in the New Yorker. I was writing a lot
for the New Yorker then for their blog.
I wrote a piece in the New Yorker
saying, "It's great, but it does have
these problems. It's always going to be
good at some things but not good at
other things. It's always going to be
good at pattern recognition and
statistical analysis and that's great
but we also do a lot of abstraction. So
we know how a family tree works or we
can reason about things in the world and
it's never going to be really good at
that. It's not really suited to that.
And this was obvious to me from the work
I had done on these systems in their
earlier carnations and also from the
work I had done on human cognition
understanding how human minds work. If
you know Daniel Conorman's famous book,
thinking fast and slow, that was
>> I've read it.
>> You know, he argues for what he calls
system one and system two cognition. The
system one is fast. It's automatic. It's
statistical. It's reflexive. And system
two is slower. It's more deliberative.
It's more about reasoning. Neural
networks are basically like system one.
And that's fine. That's part of what we
do as humans. But part of what we do is
the system two stuff. Especially on a
good day. We do the slower stuff. We're
more deliberative. We're more reasoned
about it. And these systems have never
been good at that and they still aren't
good at that. And what I said in 2012
is, you know, they do the one but not
the other. And at one level of
abstraction, what has happened in the 14
years since is that the world has gone
allin on neural networks thinking
>> and when you say neural networks, this
this is what are called large language
models.
>> So large language models are a form of
neural networks. Sorry, I didn't spell
that out. Um and in fact they didn't
exist in 2012. So a few things happened
but basically since 2012 people
developed the large language models. The
origins of that is really the
transformer paper that came out in 2017
and invested massively in it. Trillions
of dollars at this point or two trillion
dollars would be my back of the envelope
estimate on an idea that to me never
made sense. You know, they their idea
was we were going to get to everything
we need for intelligence, artificial
general intelligence, but they they
weren't careful about the system two
stuff. They were at first they just
treated it like a giant black box and
still many people do. It's like we'll
throw all this data in there and we'll
get this system that will do what we
need for intelligence without any
sophistication from a kind of scientific
perspective about what that would really
look like. I think these people were
very naive and I tried to point this out
and this it goes to the lone wolf and
stuff. For a long time people were just
dismissive. They're like we have this
thing called
>> they were more than dismissive of you.
They were disdainful. I mean I
>> really disdainful.
>> Um we could probably come up with some
some other stuff. I was disillusioned
with them. We could go on that for a
little while. Um and they they were
openly hostile to me like uh Open AI has
an emoji for Gary Marcus. I read this in
[laughter] there now.
>> Well, it's flattering in a way.
>> It's flattering and next level at the
same time, right? I tried to take it
with a sense of humor as you can see,
but um you know, that is is a measure
and you know, Sam Alman called me a
troll on Twitter or whatever. Um you
know, they really didn't want to hear
what I had to say. The core of what I
had to say was in 2022,
I wrote a paper called deep learning is
hitting a wall. And what I said in that
paper is you can keep scaling this stuff
which was the idea that was already
starting to get popular. Maybe I should
pause for a second. The idea of scaling
was that we could just pour more data
and more GPU
>> and make the model bigger bigger bigger
bigger
>> make the model bigger and bigger and it
would get to be amazing. And they had
some data in support of this but it was
also naive. Um I call it the trillion
pound baby fallacy. Right? So your baby
weighs you know 8 pounds at birth. a
month later at 16 pounds. That doesn't
mean it's going to be 32 and 64 and that
it's going to be a trillion pounds when
it goes to college, right? They made
this very naive kind of inference, which
I'm sure you see all the time um in the
business world, but a lot of people, a
lot of smart people with a lot of money
made this kind of bet. They said, "We
see these laws and we project that we
will get to intelligence by putting in
such and such amount of data." And it's
>> could we just pause just for a second?
>> Let's just backtrack for a second. the
large language models like what do they
what do they do and what do these people
think they're supposed to do? But I I
really want to kind of break that down.
There's a really great way to ask the
question. So what they do fundamentally
is they predict next things in a
sequence. So think about autocorrect on
your iPhone if you have an iPhone,
right? Similar
>> which sometimes drives me absolutely
insane. But go ahead. It doesn't always
work, but the idea is you're typing out
a sentence and it predicts what might
come next. So you say, "Meet me at the
in restaurants are pretty good guess,
right?" So you make a statistical
analysis of what people say and you know
you do okay, not perfectly and sometimes
it makes mistakes and it's annoying but
that's what we call autocomplete and I
call LLM's autocomplete on steroids.
They're a special way of doing that
prediction process. That's fundamentally
what they do. And there's some
interesting things about how they do it.
One of which is they break everything
into little bits and then they
reconstruct things which means they
actually lose connections between
information which means they sometimes
hallucinate. They make stuff up.
>> Well, let's we'll come back to the
hallucination.
>> So come back to hallucinations. That's
one of the characteristic errors and
that's one I pointed out in 2001 before
LLMs were even invented. I said if you
keep following this approach to its kind
of logical destination, you're going to
have this problem. And we turned out to
have that problem. So LLMs break stuff
up into little bits and they make
predictions about what might come next.
That works surprisingly well if what you
train them on, what you expose them to
is the entire internet because almost
any question, but almost is a critical
word there. Almost any question that you
might think of, somebody's asked before
and somebody's answered before. And at
some level, these are like glorified
memorization machines. Um,
>> there was a article in the Atlantic
about this just the other day and
there's lots of evidence for this right
along. So, for example, if you type in
part of Harry Potter, it will just
finish the, you know, the paragraph or
something like that because it's
basically memorized things. And if you
basically memorize the entire internet,
that's kind of special. Like, because
when you go and ask a question like, you
know, where did the Dodgers play um, you
know, before they were in Los Angeles,
there's lots of sentences. They'll tell
you they were born in Brooklyn. And so
you have a pretty good chance of coming
up with the answer.
>> However,
just doing that doesn't give you
abstract concepts and ideas. And
sometimes you have problems where these
little bits get broken up and then
reassembled incorrectly.
>> So can we talk about hallucinations for
a second? That's what hallucinations.
>> Define hallucination.
Why does that happen?
>> Hallucinations are when it makes
something up, presents it with perfect
confidence, and it's just not true.
>> So give us an example. My favorite
example involves a guy you might know,
Harry Sheerer. I don't know if you ever
saw Spinal Tap.
>> Oh, sure.
>> So, he plays the bass in in Spinal Tap.
And he's, as it happens, he's a friend
of mine. So, he plays bass in Spinal
Tap. And also, and it matters to the
story that he's reasonably wellknown.
So, he he um he played bass and Spinal
Tap. He was in a bunch of those movies
with Christopher J. Guest. He was in the
Truman Show. And he does the voices for
Mr. Burns and the Simpson and a few
other characters.
>> Okay. Um, so this is what makes this
story interesting. So I'm going to
rewind for one second, which is to say
my old favorite example of
hallucinations involve me. Somebody sent
me a biography of me that said I owned a
pet chicken named Henrietta, which I
don't. So that's a pretty good example
of hallucination. It's just made up.
Turns out there was an author named or
an illustrator named Gary Oswald or
something who wrote a book about
Henrietta goes to school or and it's
just like munching together all these
little bits of information. Why does it
hallucinate?
>> So, this has to do with the breaking up
of little bits of information. So, let
me walk you through the Harry Sheer
example. So, I kept using the pet
chicken Henrietta thing. So, one day he
writes to me and says, "No, Henrietta,
but then he gives an example where the
hallucination is about him." He's much
more famous than I am, or at least than
I used to be. I'm starting to get a
little um and um it says that he's a
British voiceover actor and comedian,
only he's not British. If you went to
Wikipedia for two seconds, you would see
he was born in Los Angeles. And because
he's famous, you could also go to Rotten
Tomatoes or to IMDb and he's done lots
of interviews and talked about where
he's growing up. He was a child star on
the Jack Benning Show in Los Angeles.
Like, it's not hard to find the right
information. We imagine falsely that
large language models are intelligent
beings like us, but really all they're
doing is reconstructing statistically
probable relationships between bits of
information
>> and so they can be wrong
>> and those can be wrong. Sometimes those
reconstructions are wrong and in this
case it was wrong. In some sense, what
it does is it builds like a cluster of
things that predict other things
statistically. And it turns out there's
a lot of British voiceover actors and
comedians. There's, you know, Ricky
Gerve and and um um John Cle and etc,
etc., right? Um and so it just blurs all
of that stuff together. And the blurring
process on the whole works reasonably
well, but you can never trust any
particular thing is going to be right.
And so these hallucinations happen all
the time. There was a guy who was
tracking legal cases where lawyers
published or not published but submitted
briefs where they were made up
references, citations to cases that
didn't exist. The first time I looked,
he had found like 300 cases. The next
time it was like 3 months later, he
found 600 cases of lawyers not only did
this but got caught, got busted by
judges doing this. They they using these
tools like chat GPT to do their work for
them. But it makes mistakes and those
mistakes, this is the insidious part,
slip by. People don't notice. Another
example is um CNET was one of the first
places to use AI to write its articles.
And in the first batch of 75, like half
of them had errors. The editors didn't
notice them because everything is
grammatical and well-formed and there
aren't typos and people tune out. I call
it the looks good to me effect. LLM give
you the looks good to me effect which
has led to another new term that I wish
I had invented called work slop. So work
slop which um a couple professors I
guess invented last year is a term for
people write these reports they submit
them you know to their employer they
look superficially good but they're
wrong they have mistakes in them because
LLMs don't really understand
>> and what you're saying is LLMs don't
think. They really don't think
>> they just slam things together that
statistically
normally makes sense to slam them
together.
>> They they they slam exactly or glom is
another verb I like there. They glom
things together
>> and and you know a lot of them are right
statistically speaking and some of them
are wrong. And the systems don't know
the difference. They can't tell you the
difference. They don't ever say like,
"Well, it seems to me that, you know,
everything like Wikipedia says that
Harry Sheer was born in in Los Angeles,
but I have the vibe as an LLM that it's
London and maybe you should check that."
I mean, they never give you any of that.
They just present everything as if they
were an encyclopedia, no matter whether
it's true or not, which is one of the
reasons why these systems are insidious.
In my Substack that's going to come out
before this airs that I've already
written in my next substack
>> subscriber,
>> um, thank you for subscribing.
[laughter]
Um, I'm going to talk about a new
article I saw this morning that blew my
mind that talked about basically how
LLMs are undermining the institutions of
society, including things like democracy
and civic order and so forth in no small
part because of this tendency towards
errors,
>> right? So they're undermining the
quality of almost all the institutions
in life by making fake information and
basically undermining the information
ecosphere. I mean, just like think about
democracy. Like democracy only works if
the voters actually understand what's
going on, right? The whole point is the
voters reflect on the world and then
they bring their perspective from, you
know, their religion, their childhood,
their neighborhood, or whatever. But if
everybody's getting garbage all the
time, that doesn't work anymore.
>> Well, I was I was reading on the day
that Maduro got taken by the United
States, you you wrote here, we were all
watching, you know, like the whole
country sitting there watching like CNN
or or whomever. We're literally watching
this guy get taken out of Venezuela and
Chat GPT is telling you that it hasn't
happened.
>> That's right. That it is
>> that it's fake news. That we're watching
it on the TV and they're telling you
it's fake news.
>> Yeah. I mean, there are many problems.
That's a different problem, but it's not
unrelated. That's
>> what is that problem?
>> That problem is these things all have a
cut off date. So they get trained at a
particular moment and the there's kind
of a core model that only knows what's
happened up to then and then they put
different band-aids on it like they make
it do web search and whatever but none
of the band-aids are very well
integrated and you know some of the
systems do that better than others. So
has has a problem with novelty,
something new.
>> They that is the deepest problem
actually going, you know, going back to
my work in 1998, I realized very early
on that was the deepest problem with
these systems is if you're basically a
glorified memorization machine and I
bring you something that's far enough
away from what you've seen before,
you're in trouble. amazing example of
this. I don't know the underlying
details, but um Tesla um does a lot of
this kind of memorization kind of stuff,
but its AI systems are not that
sophisticated. And one day someone used
the summon feature. You remember how
Elon said that you're going to be able
to call your car from Los Angeles to New
York? You can't really do that, but you
can call it across a parking lot,
apparently. So, somebody did this at an
airplane trade show. You can find the
video on YouTube. They they call their
car. They want to be like, "Cool, I'm at
an airplane shade show and I'm going to
have my Tesla come over to me." And it
ran directly into a $3.5 million jet,
right? The system [laughter] didn't have
in its training data what to do with a
jet because who trains a car to avoid a
jet?
>> And so it didn't have a general
understanding of the world, like don't
drive into things that are expensive or
big or physical objects in your path.
Didn't understand any of that. It's just
like looking for things that match
bicycles and pedestrians and so forth.
They didn't have a category for jets and
so we ran into it.
>> Let me let me press a question. So,
>> hi Steve Eisman here. You listen to my
show because I try to give you the facts
about the market and my opinion. But
it's not always easy to filter through
all the information and hype out there,
especially when it comes to figuring out
how to invest. And if you've had some
success in life, you are probably
getting bombarded with investment
advice. Suddenly, everyone has a great
new idea or product for you, a new fund,
a tax scheme, a once- ina-lifetime
private deal. How do you know what's
real? By joining a community of people
who face the same concerns as you. That
is why I'm recommending you take a look
at Longle. Longle is not a wealth
manager. They aren't trying to sell you
a product. It is a private vetted
community of high- networth investors,
entrepreneurs, executives, and
professionals. It's a community filled
with people like you. Members use it to
compare notes on everything from
investment ideas to due diligence on
private deals to navigating complex tax
codes to the personal stuff like how to
raise grounded kids when you have money.
I talk a lot about old school due
diligence and that is what this is all
about. It's 6,500
vetted members sharing unbiased
intelligence. No salesman allowed. If
you're looking for a place to ask
questions and get answers from people
who aren't trying to earn a commission
off you, this is it. Go to
longangle.com/isman.
Membership is free, but you have to
qualify. Again, that's
longangle.com/isman
to apply. These these models have
scaled. You know, it was chat GPT1,
chatp2, 3, 4, 5, and now Gemini is
supposed to be better. When when people
say that the new Gemini is better than
let's say Chat GPT5, what does that mean
to in in in practicality? That's
actually a really interesting question
because there isn't a simple answer to
it. What they're really saying is like
for the things I do, I happen to get
better results. Most of the people who
are saying that are saying that
intuitively without even quantitative
data. And the thing about these systems
is we're pressing them into a very broad
service unlike almost anything else.
Like if you have a car, you can test it.
How does it go in the snow? How does it
go in in you know in the rain etc.
There's a kind of regime that you can
test and it's pretty well known. If you
had a calculator we don't really need to
do this because we know almost by proof
by uh construction. We know that the
calculator will be correct. when when
the Intel uh chip made an error in
floating point numbers, I think this is
about 20 years ago, was a huge scandal
that it wasn't 100% correct, but it was
like 99.9999%
correct. Um, but there's only so many
things you can ask a calculator to do
and so you can basically prove that it
is correct. We can't do that with LLMs
with large language models because they
can be asked to do anything and
different people ask them to do
different things and so everybody has
their own opinion about which model is
better like almost certainly on almost
everything with some qualification. GPT5
is going to be better than GPT4 and is
going to be better than three and it's a
question of how much better but it's a
hard question to answer. It depends very
much on what you're testing it on. So
when people say you know Gemini is
better than GPT 5.2 or whatever they
really mean for the things I do and
people do very different things. So some
people use these systems for example to
help them with coding. Other people use
them to help them with brainstorming.
Some people may do financial analyses
and so forth and so on. There's sort of
endless and it makes it very hard to
make a definitive statement. Instead you
know people kind of try it out and they
have the intuition. I actually haven't
played that much with Gemini. I played
with a lot of these models and kept
seeing the same patterns over and over
again. And to me, that's boring. Like I
come to all of this from a scientific
perspective. I want to see something
that works differently. And when I see
something that works differently, I'm
going to spend a lot of time testing it.
>> So you you have said that that these
models are reaching
diminishing returns. So in other words,
two was much better than one. Three was
much better than two, five was better
than four, but less than four was better
than three. Like my question to you is
first of all like how do you know that
like based based on what did are you do
you are you feel confident you could say
that you can look at benchmarks and say
how much better do they do on these
standardized measures you can try them
out intuitively the with the earlier
models the leaps really were so dramatic
you you didn't even need formal measures
it was just obvious if you played with
the original GPT1 it was terrible like
it was like the old joke about that that
it can answer your questions at all was
kind of impressive, but like you know it
was almost always wrong. It was it was
useless. GPT2 was legitimately better.
You would ask it questions. It would be
more grammatical. It wouldn't be
completely out to lunch. Like you didn't
It's like, you know, you go for an eye
exam and they show you the two different
lenses and you're like, I'm not really
sure. Is this one better? You didn't
need that for GPT2 versus GPT1. It was
just better. Same thing with GPT3 versus
GPT2. almost anything that you would
test it on, it would give you a better,
fuller, more grammatical answer, etc.
Same with GPT4 versus GPT3. You didn't
need to get to some, you know, obscure
test. You just played with it for half
an hour obviously
give you a better answer for many
things, but it's it's not the same giant
leap forward. It's one where you do need
to have measures in order to indicate
the progress. So let's let's press that
for a second because from let's bring it
to my side, the business side. I mean
these companies, these hyperscalers,
Microsoft, they've been buying, you
know, GPU chips, like they've been going
out of style. And, you know, the amount
of money that all these hyperscalers
spent in two 2025 just the pure
hyperscalers was probably something like
$500 billion, more or less, which is not
exactly chump change.
>> That's right. And no one actually knows
because I've asked as many people as I
can. You know, how much of all the GPUs
that Nvidia is selling are going to
companies that are creating LLMs? But
it's obviously not a small number.
>> Presumably a lot, especially the
higherend ones.
>> Yes, there's no question it's a lot. Is
it 30, 40, 60, 70? No one. There's no
there's not I I haven't literally have
not even found a number, but it's it's
clearly a very high percentage. It's
very important. So if if your view
were suddenly tomorrow to become the
dominant view and you know let's say I'm
I'm in Microsoft
or I'm at Meta and I'm in the department
that's developing this stuff and I and
all of a sudden I got converted to the
Gary Marcus religion.
I would have to say to myself,
I gotta take a step back because
we've basically gotten to more or less
where we're gonna get
doing what we've been doing. And you
know, Ilas gave us things we need to go
back to the drawing board, which we'll
talk about what that means. I don't even
I'm not sure exactly what that means.
And so therefore, this the the the
amount of GPUs people will buy would
have to slow dramatically as people took
a step back and figure, okay, what do we
do now?
Where is the community, you know, the
entire computer science scientific
community, you think, right now in this
debate, because you're not the lone wolf
anymore, but just you you and your your
people who agree with you, you're still
in the minority. What's happening? What
what are you hearing about what's going
on? I'm
>> not sure we're in the minority anymore.
I think things have changed pretty
dramatically in the last six months. So,
we were definitely at least in the
minority in certain conversations. I
think among longtime AI researchers, I
was never in the minority. I was in the
minority in terms of how the media
reported things and I was in the
minority with respect to the people
running these companies.
>> Yes.
>> But you know there was a survey done by
triple AI which is the American or what
is it the association for the
advancement of artificial intelligence.
It's the arguably the biggest most
longstanding AI organization. They did a
survey, a presidential survey, I think
it was called about a year ago, and 85%
of the people in that survey, which were
mostly like college professors, industry
researchers, but not necessarily the big
companies, 85% of them said that large
language models are not going to get us
to the holy grail of so-called
artificial general intelligence. So, I
mean, a lot of people have seen the
writing on the wall for a while. I've
always been the most vocal. I think I've
been the least afraid to like, you know,
take the flack. And I think I've been
articulated about it because I've
thought about these issues for a very
long time and they were kind of very
central to my academic work. But there
are lots of other people that have seen
I think what I saw. Um what's really
remarkable about the last several months
and I'll tell you what I think the
turning point was is how many other
people have started to see it. So you
just mentioned Ilaskever. That's really
a big
>> and just so people know he he was one of
the founders of Open AI but he's left
and he's starting his own founder of
Open AI but he was also a co-author on
this paper about using GPUs for for not
large language models but their
predecessor for G.
>> So he was there at the beginning
>> he was there at the beginning of what we
might call the rebirth a 2012 rebirth
that was such a big deal. So for him to
give an interview on this podcast by
Doresh saying we need to go back to the
age of research this isn't really
working that is a huge deal. Um now I
don't think he said anything I wasn't
saying all along but you know coming
from him like it carries a certain
weight. Um so there was that but I think
the real turning point was actually in
August. So if you rewind, you go back
and you look at interviews and stuff
from 2023, 2024, Sam Alman basically
kept hinting that GPT5 was going to be
artificial general intelligence or close
to it. For example, in January, just a
year ago, he wrote in his blog that we
now know how to make artificial general
intelligence in the conventional sense.
And people were for years talking about
when is GPT5 gonna drop. It was kind of
like waiting for GDAU or something like
that. You you're you're kind of my era.
Do you remember Airplane? Um,
>> of course.
>> You remember the last scene where
they're landing and it's now arriving
gate eight, now arriving gate nine as
[laughter] it screams.
>> Yes, I remember. I remember.
>> So, I wrote in a bad day to quit
sniffing glue.
>> Bad day to quit sniffing glue. So, I
wrote in my Substack about that
phenomena as applied to GPT5 because in
January of 2024, they were like, I think
it's going to drop after the Super Bowl.
it's going to be so amazing like the two
and then you know then it didn't happen
and they're like in July I you know I
read on Twitter this guy named
Strawberry said it's all going to happen
and he's got inside information and like
it never came it was always a lie right
and so I wrote this thing I think it was
actually over well over a year ago about
now arriving gate 8 now you know GPT5
now arriving gate 8 now arriving gate 9
and so forth and it just kept getting
delayed and pushed back and pushed back
but Sam all the while kept implying that
it was going to be this amazing thing
and in fact when he introduced it which
I happen to know exactly what the date
was August 7th of 2025
it he finally introduced it there's an
aside about an earlier model that called
GPT4 and a half that was supposed to be
five they didn't even want to call it
that cuz it wasn't good enough but
finally decided to release something
called it that GPT5 and he's like it can
do anything a PhD can do but they
released it to the public and it took
the public like an hour to realize this
wasn't true that it was still making
these hallucinations and stupid
>> same problems.
>> Same problems, you know, fewer of them.
Like it was it was legit better, but not
so much better, right? He sold it as if
it was going to be a quantum leap
forward the way that four was compared
to three and three was compared to two.
And it just wasn't that. And the
community who had been hoping it was
going to be that was disappointed. And
literally that day, people started
writing stuff on Twitter that cracked me
up. They'd be like, "I hate to say it,
but Gary Marcus."
>> Gary Marcus was right. I remember I
remember I was reading it's like, "Oh,
Gary Marcus, not just a lone wolf
anymore."
>> Exactly. Somebody wrote a book using
probably chat GBT called Gary Marcus was
right, you know, shortly after these
events um took place. Um [snorts]
like it became a thing that I was right
after all this time. And it's really the
disappointment of chat GPT5 that
transformed that. But where do you think
>> if I don't know if you know you you
connected this way have you heard about
what's going on at all within the
companies now that this sort of tone of
this debate is changing. I mean I guess
a few things are happening. So one is I
have been saying all along you can't use
pure large language models. You have to
use classical symbolic AI. And they all
just scoffed and like that's scary. We
don't need this stuff. We don't know how
it works in the brain. And now they've
all quietly started doing it to some
extent. So they use things called code
interpreters which run Python code which
is classic symbolic tools. Um and so
they're sneaking the system 2 stuff
inside. They're not making a big deal of
it but it's actually making a big
difference. This was really clear at the
presentation of Grock 4 um where Elon
Musk showed a graph and I wrote about
this in a essay called how 03 and Gro 4
accidentally vindicated neuros symbolic
AI. I have this graph there and what it
shows is really the addition of symbolic
tools that they're not really talking
about that's making the systems work
better. You know they're still improving
a bit and that's where they're getting
most of the improvement. So part of it
is they've quietly stopped doing just
LLMs. But for your world that's
significant because those symbolic
things are not running on the GPUs,
they're running on CPUs.
>> Ah okay.
>> And I mean for me for the technical
issues it's vindicating of the approach
that I was talking about. So that's one
thing that's happening. Another thing
that's happening is everybody's leaving
to start their own startup. Now think
about it. If you were at OpenAI and they
really were going to release AGI next
week, would you want to leave just
before this cataclysmic event that was
going to revolutionize the world and go
start a little company that's going to
take, you know, four years to develop or
whatever? Of course, you wouldn't. You'd
want to be there for the magical
coordination. So, the fact that
everybody is leaving tells you that they
don't really have what they think. And
then, um, what else is going on? you
know, Google is catching up because as I
projected in my Substack a couple years
ago because everybody's doing mostly the
same thing. There's no moat here.
There's no technical mode,
>> right? All I think what you are you and
some other people have argued is that if
if all you're doing is constantly
scaling an LLM, the winner is the person
who can afford to scale the LLM. And who
who can afford more than Google? Nobody.
>> Yeah. I mean, I made a slightly
different version of that argument,
though that version is probably correct,
which was that you were going to have a
pile up near the top and that you're
going to have a price war um as these
things became commodities, prices would
drop. And in fact, prices have dropped
by 100, a factor of 100 um and how much
you pay for a token. So, we have had
that price score. I think it is also
true that in the end that favors Google.
I didn't really formulate the argument
that way originally, but when I started
writing about it, I think it was March
of 24, maybe it was August of 23, I
said, "Look, everybody's following the
same recipe here. Nobody has some secret
sauce."
>> And so that means you're going to have a
convergence at the top.
>> It's a commodity at the top
>> where everybody's going to make models
that are a little bit better than last
year's, but not that much better. And so
it's not going to matter anymore. And
what is what has that meant? It's meant
Google has caught up, and it's meant
that China has caught up, and it's meant
that Anthropic has caught up. And so
that has also driven, as you say, it's a
commodity that has driven the prices
down. Um, which is good for the end
consumer, but not good for the business
model where I'm going to pay you a
ton of money for GPUs cuz I'm going to
make a ton of money.
>> Can we move on to inference models for a
second? Could you just explain to my
audience what's the difference between
an inference model versus an LLM model?
And are inference models based on LLM
models?
Inference models work over LLMs, but
instead of sort of spitting out the
first answer, they iterate. They take
time to try to come up with the best
answer. People have not been super um
forthcoming about exactly how they're
doing it. But the original idea of most
of these neural networks was kind of
oneshot in a certain sense although
people use that term in different way in
in the sense that you would feed
something in it would immediately do a
pass through the neural network which
means that every node in the neural
network roughly speaking um I'm
simplifying a little bit would see
something and generate its answer and
now what they did is say let's do
multiple passes which is really very
different right the first thing is what
a friend of mine called constant time
inference. You know how long it's going
to take to compute your answer is
everything takes basically the same
time. You feed it through your pattern
recognizer. It gives you the best answer
based on the pattern in the scene
before. This new paradigm inference time
which I'll talk talk about where it's
worked and where it has not means that
you spend longer on some problems than
others. Now, nobody's figured out
entirely how to make that all work well,
but there are some cases where it works
pretty well. As far as I can tell, part
of what they're doing is they're getting
humans to talk through problems and it's
trying to mimic that, right? These are
mimicry systems. Now, what you're doing
is trying to mimic what a human would do
when they solve this geometry problem or
this algebra problem or something like
that. It's trying to mimic that process.
And that process for human takes a bunch
of steps and it for the neural network
um that in includes this stuff it takes
a bunch of steps.
>> So what is this good for? What is this
turned out to be not so good for?
>> So before I answer that question I'll
insert one other thing. It inherently is
more expensive. So you're using more
time on your GPUs to generate
>> your answer each answer.
>> Um okay so what is it good for and not
good for? What it seems to be best for
are places where you can generate
formally correct verifiable data to
train your model on. So good example of
this is math or computer programming
where you can write a program to
generate different possible pieces of
code to teach your system or different
possible geometry proofs and things like
that. Um and you can do that in those
domains because they're kind of closed
domains. There's limits on
>> mean limits of how much knowledge is in
the database.
>> Exactly. How much and how much knowledge
is relevant.
>> Right.
>> Right. Um and that is what they've been
best at is things like geometry and
things like computer coding. What
they've not been good at is the
open-ended real world. I always think
from your world, although you'd know the
example better than I do, of when
long-term capital uh management went
bust because nobody had really thought
it was a different kind of model, but
nobody had thought about what happens if
the Russian bond uh uh market you know
does something
>> and so like you know there was a major
collapse in in US financial markets
because of what happened in the Russian
bond market. Um, so that was outside of
how the parameters of how those models
which worked on different principles
were built. We're seeing something
similar here, which is like the system
doesn't actually know how to think about
bonds or anything else. And if what it's
trained on is or sorry, what it's tested
on or used for is really similar to what
it's been trained on, everything's hunky
dory. But if you push it outside its
comfort zone, and we talked about the
Tesla um example as well, then they tend
to break down.
>> So it has a problem with novelty. And if
something's not in the database,
>> that is really the core problem even
with the new inference models. It's sort
of a slightly different variation, but
it's still fundamentally an issue of
novelty. And here's the thing, most
things that are interesting in the world
involve some measure of novelty. Not all
of them. And it turns out that you can
use techniques that are not all that
great at novelty to do something in a
narrow domain like chess or go where the
rules haven't varied significantly.
There's some variation um in the last
thousand or you know 2,000 years. So you
have a lot of data. You can do selfplay
generate more data for yourself and so
forth. But when you're talking about the
open-ended real world, if you're talking
about politics or military strategy, um,
or, you know, there's always going to be
stuff that isn't in there, like how do
you deal with the notion that you have a
president who seems to be willing to
have um planes dressed up as civilian
planes um, you know, attack people in in
another country. Like that hasn't
happened before. How do you reason about
that? Well, you can't just look at the
past data anymore. you have to start to
think about concepts about like I don't
know power and diplomacy and and and how
things are constructed that you know
other kinds of scholars would be better
at than me but um you know you have to
have the right training and the right
abstractions and so forth you can't just
rely on the data anymore and what has
happened in business use I think is even
when you're doing something like
customer service that seems relatively
easily easy to handle people are always
asking some question a little bit
differently than before and that's when
the systems tend to break down in the
face of novelty.
>> So let's say I appointed you AI ZAR and
you were in control of all of these
companies and you you're going to direct
them. If you were to sit all these
people in a room, what would you tell
them that they need to do to go to the
next level? Really go to the next level.
>> I would say that they need much more
intellectual diversity. So in your world
you tell people don't put all your money
in one stock right diversify you know
stocks and bonds and gold and real
estate right um basically the field went
all in on one idea for the last
>> scale the LLM
>> scaling the LLM was the one idea and you
know they got some mileage out of it's
not useless there are things we can
actually use them for but it did not
bring us to the holy grail of artificial
general intelligence and it turned out
also be a very expensive and very
inefficient approach. If you compare
like how much data my children have
needed to understand the world versus
needing the entire internet like it's
sort of comical how inefficient these
systems are. So they made these
inefficient in unreliable systems that
have some use for a lot of money. We
need to have other approaches that are
more efficient that are more economical
that are more reliable and they should
be putting money into trying to think
about that. But the problem is partly
comes from your world is venture
capitalists get
you know 2% of investing on schemes that
sound plausible right so if you're a
venture capitalist and I'm curious your
take on my take um because it's more
your world than mine if you're a venture
capitalist and you have a story about
how I can invest your trillion dollars
and I get my 2% I don't have to care
that much how it's all going to play out
because 2% of a trillion dollars would
make me a very rich person. And so I'm
not saying every venture capitalist
thinks that way. I think, you know, I've
met a lot and some of them I think
really do want to advance technology and
so forth, but a lot of them are cynical.
Um, like you might find in any
profession. And what pays if you are a
cynical venture capitalist is to find an
idea that sounds plausible, doesn't have
to work, that is very expensive, and you
can take your 2% cut on. And I think
that that's what's happened is people
have gone all in on the scaling because
they get a cut and the cut is pretty
big. But it has not been the
intellectually right thing to do and it
has not led to good results which means
a lot of money has been squandered. The
VCs got their 2% cut. The limited
partners are going to lose a lot of
money in the end I think.
>> Do you think we're close to that
happening or it's impossible to tell?
>> I mean you know the saying as well as I
do about shorting, right? the market can
remain irrational longer than you can
remain solvent. Correct. But the
metaphor that I was using last year was
wy coyote at the end of a cliff, right?
In in Bugs Bunny, right? He doesn't fall
down until he looks down, which is of
course not how physics actually works,
but makes it funny.
>> I think that people have started to look
down in your world. In your world, in
the investment community, people are I
think this really began in November,
starting to say, "Hey, I see all this
circular financing.
The results on return on investment are
not that great. The systems still are
not really working that well for me.
Maybe this doesn't make sense." Right? I
think personally that Nvidia makes a
fantastic product. Their ecosystem is
amazing.
>> The chip is and it's not even just the
chip. It's the software around it. has
everything.
>> I've met Jensen. I'm impressed by him.
It's a great product. But the question
is, how many of them are they going to
sell at the end of the day? And I think
that they've been selling them all on
speculation. People are speculating.
And I'll come back to how other people
think in a second. People are
speculating that there's going to be
essentially infinite demand for this.
But that speculation is based on the
notion that these things are actually
going to give us artificial general
intelligence. real artificial general
intelligence that could do anything a
human could do would be worth a
tremendous amount of money, certainly
trillions of dollars every year. Um, but
like there's another study that was just
reported in the Washington Post a couple
days ago, was done a month earlier, um,
showing that only two and a half% of the
jobs that people do with the AI systems
actually able to do, you know, so most
things that people are fantasizing that
AI is going to do for them,
>> they don't do,
>> they don't really do. And that means at
the end of the day that all these
investments in chips don't make sense.
It means at some point like I think Open
AI is probably the most vulnerable
company here. Open AI has you know
trillion plus dollars in outstanding
commitments has never made a profit.
There's now in a commodity market. their
biggest competitor, Google, caught up.
And not only they caught up, but
yesterday
>> um got the Apple deal, which is a really
big deal that you know,
>> and so like I think that they're
flailing. I don't see how they're going
to warrant their valuation.
>> Well, if Open AI, I mean, for my world,
if Open AI, if people started to pull
money from Open AI and they couldn't
raise money,
that would be a cascading effect in
terms of the entire eos.
I think in the end open AI maybe gets
absorbed by Microsoft or something like
that. I've been saying for a couple
years I think they're going to be viewed
as the wei work of AI and people are
going to be like how did they get valued
at that? Like it just didn't make sense,
right? Like OpenAI's revenue is a few
billion dollars and but they're losing
billions of dollars every month. They
have all these competitors. Like it just
doesn't make sense. And if people pull
out of open AI or just don't put more
money in, then they're in deep trouble,
right? So they're losing whatever it is,
$3 billion a month, you know, 30 some
billion dollars a year, something like
that. Right. And they just got a $40
billion funding round. That gives them
like a year's runway, right?
>> Right.
>> But that's it. And a lot of people are
probably standing on the sidelines
saying, "Hey, wait. Google's better
suited to play this game. They've
actually caught up. If it's only scale,
then Google wins. If it's only scale,
Google wins. Hands down. How could they
not?
>> Google can make the commitments. Google
doesn't even need Nvidia because they
making their own tensor pro processor
units that do kind of the same work. And
so like they're less vulnerable. They
have a, you know, financial pipeline.
They're going to win. Right.
>> Right. And it doesn't take that many
people to think that. OpenAI is in a
position where the check size that they
need to stay afloat is just massive,
>> right? They're next going to need like a
hundred billion dollar check. Not many
people can write you a hundred billion
dollar check. You know, five people in
the world maybe can do that. And if four
of them say no, you're okay. But the
minute five of them say no, you're out
of business or you're going to Microsoft
saying, "What can you give us?"
>> Right. So Gary, before we go, is there
anything I should have asked you that I
haven't asked you?
>> I thought this was a great interview. Um
I don't know. I mean, um I guess there's
one thing we didn't talk about which is
important. Um which is this notion of
world model.
>> Yes, I I did want to talk about it. You
you have discussed that we need world
models that is so outside like you know
my area of expertise. Why why don't you
just explain to what exactly you're
talking about? So, so a world model is
basically something inside a computer. I
mean, different people have definitions,
but I'll tell you what I think we need.
You need something inside your software
that represents the things outside in
the world. So, if you're a GPS
navigation system, you need, for
example, to be able to represent what
the roads are and how they connect, how
long does traffic take on them. In
classical artificial intelligence, world
models are the starting point. Everybody
has them. No, nobody would even think
about not using them. Herb Simon wrote a
who was one of the founders of
artificial intelligence in the 1950s
wrote a biography that I think was
called models of my mind. He thought
about models, world models all the time.
And he realized that the right way to do
AI was to have the right world model.
Large language models try to do without
that. You know, it's a lot of work to
build a model of a particular thing,
especially a complicated thing. Like
when people built expert systems, they
would build a model of how a doctor
thought about things, a model of how the
patient worked, what the physiology was.
Like it's a pain to do that. There's a
whole field called knowledge
engineering. It was expensive. Nobody
wanted to do it. And so language models
and and other kinds of neural networks
came in and said, "You don't need to do
that. We're just going to let everything
percolate up from the data." That
doesn't really work. So when the large
language model tells you that Harry
Shear was born in London when he was
actually born in Los Angeles, it's
because it doesn't have a proper world
model, it can't just look that up like a
properly designed piece of software
would. And so we need to have world
models fit in here somewhere to avoid
the hallucinations.
>> I still don't understand what a world
model is. So a world model is it's hard
to do this in non-technical terms is a
representation
>> of the world
>> of the world and it the it doesn't even
have to be the real world. So for
example we have world models of um
fictional domains like the Star Trek
universe or the Star Wars or the Harry
Potter universe, right? So when you go
to a movie and this is the amazing thing
to me about humans compared to current
uh systems. When you go to a movie, you
read a book, you build a model of how
that world works in your head and you
can ask questions like was that
plausible in this real in this world or
were the movies makers doing a cheat or
you know if you watch Harry Potter then
you understand that people can fly
around in broomsticks but you don't
confuse that with your world and you
know jump on a broomstick and when you
get home the window
>> actually going to fly right
>> so we actually maintain many of these
and we build them very quickly. You
watch an episode of a new science
fiction show and you know 20 minutes in
you start to understand a different
world. So we're really good at this. In
AI neither approach is that good at it.
So classical AI is really good at doing
it by hand. So you can pay a bunch of
philosophers to spend six weeks and
describe your problem. Um a a great
researcher who passed away recently,
Doug Lennett, did this with Romeo and
Juliet. He showed that his system could
you could handwire Romeo and Juliet and
then it could understand you know key
plot points and was very impressive and
it could do that without you know
reading secondhand reports from cliff
notes that were in the internet it could
just actually understand it was amazing
but we don't know how to get classical
AI to acquire these models and large
language models don't really do it at
all they fake it my favorite example of
this is if you well not if you one
trains them on the whole internet so
they get access to a lot of written
rules of chess and lots of games of
chess and they still make illegal moves.
They never really abstract the model of
how chess works. That's just so damning.
You would not be able to learn chess
after seeing a million games, reading
the rules in Wikipedia and chess.com,
reading books like wiki uh like um Bobby
Fischer plays chess and all this stuff
and he just never gets it right. So we
need systems that can induce is the word
I would use world models that can look
at a set of data try to understand the
causal principles the entities that are
involved. This is a hard question. It's
not a like oh somebody's going to go
home tomorrow and fix it question. It's
a question that the both approaches have
avoided for a long time and that we need
to face now.
>> Well that's going to take time.
>> It's going to take time. Going back to
your world, I think the thing is
artificial intelligence really is going
to transform the world like in ways we
can't even imagine. But it's not going
to do it now. Not with this technology.
Okay?
>> And we need to like factor that in and
make investments. Are we making research
investments? Are we making scaling of
investments [clears throat] on
technology that already works?
>> No. What we're doing mostly is
speculating that something that doesn't
work is going to magically work
>> if we make it bigger.
just making it bigger is not going to
solve these problems. We need to do
foundational research. That's what I was
saying for the last 5 years and that's
what Sudskver said in November. And when
Skever says that too when we kind of
come from opposite ends and converge on
that, people should actually listen.
>> Gary, that was wonderful. Thank you. It
was incredibly educational and I really
appreciate you coming on my show.
>> Thanks a lot for having me.
>> Thank you. [music]
This podcast is forformational purposes
only and does not constitute investment
advice. The hosts and guests [music] may
hold positions in stocks discussed.
Opinions expressed on their own and not
recommendations. Please do your own due
diligence and consult a licensed
financial advisor before [music] making
any investment decisions.
Let's start with a company that I think
is a classic short, Stalantis. So, you
recommended shorting it in June of 2024.
The stock was 20 and as of I think
yesterday was $9.40.
So, that's a good short. Who is
Stellantis and why was it a short?
>> They bought American cars. They bought
>> Dodge Ram.
>> So, why was this company in trouble? It
goes back to 2020. COVID started and
everything was shut down. So the
government started giving stimulus
checks to all consumers, everyone. And
that started a whole batch of problems.
When the stimulus checks went to
consumers, some of them started to pay
down the debt,
>> their own debt,
>> their own debt, right?
>> And some of them started to buy cars and
>> bought a car. So when the demand was
like that and what we heard from our
sources is that the quality wasn't that
good
>> because they were producing too many.
>> Yes.
>> So not good enough quality control.
>> Not enough quality control. Everybody
started to buy cars and people who paid
down their personal debt, their credit
scores started to go up. Now you have
subprime borrowers became prime
borrowers
>> because the government gave them a check
to pay off their debt. So all of a
sudden there are more consumers who can
afford to buy cars because they're going
to get a better loan.
>> Yes.
>> Okay.
>> And the car companies and dealerships
got very greedy.
>> Really?
>> Yes.
>> I'm shocked. [laughter]
>> The problem started to happen. All the
subsidy money stopped,
>> right?
>> And the reality started to kick in and
that's when we realized, Steve, this car
industry is such a an organized mess.
They are all in it together. You don't
think the Fed is like the big decision?
>> I think this whole thing is laughable. I
mean, when you think about it, the only
time the Fed really matters is when it's
being very aggressive at cutting rates
or very aggressive at raising rates. If
it's just tinkering around the edges,
which is what it's clearly doing, it's
irrelevant.
>> Although Leeman made the argument this
morning that what they're doing with the
balance sheet might be a little more
important. it on the margin, but you
know, is is what they're doing right now
going to make you buy Palunteer or not
buy Palunteer? It has no impact. How far
do you think we are away [music] from
Steve Eisman saying, "I'm going to buy
an EV cuz this has so many more features
than I have than I could get with just
buying a regular combustion engine car."
>> So, Tesla is leading that effort right
now in the industry though to [music]
your point that there are other
automakers. You know, GM has talked a
lot about uh personal AVs. They made a
substantial hire not too long ago. So,
it is being pursued by others, but Tesla
seems to be in a multi-year lead. I
would say if the next 12 months, maybe
15 months, [music]
there's nothing on this front from
Tesla, that would be disappointing to to
our to us and our thesis [music] around
what they can do. But the rest of the
industry is probably still a few years
away. Maybe it's 3 4 years before this
becomes a bit more of a reality more
broadly.